In this video we will cover lists and tuples.
These are called compound data types and are one of the key types of data
structures in Python. Tuples.
Tuples are an ordered sequence. Here is a tuple
ratings. Tuples are expressed as comma separated elements within parentheses.
These are values inside the parentheses. In Python, there are different types:
strings, integer, float. They can all be contained
in a tuple but the type of the variable is tuple.
Each element of a tuple can be accessed via an index.
The following table represents the relationship between the index and the
elements in the tuple. The first element can be accessed by the
name of the tuple followed by a square bracket with the index number,
in this case zero. We can access the second element as follows.
We can also access the last element. In Python, we can use negative index.
The relationship is as follows. The corresponding values are shown here.
We can concatenate or combine tuples by adding them.
The result is the following with the following index.
If we would like multiple elements from a tuple, we could also slice
tuples. For example, if we want the first three elements
we use the following command. The last index is one larger than the
index you want; similarly if we want the last two elements,
we use the following command. Notice, how the last index is one larger than the
length of the tuple. We can use the len command to obtain the
length of a tuple. As there are five elements, the result is 5.
Tuples are immutable which means we can't change them.
To see why this is important, let's see what happens when we set the variable
ratings 1 to ratings. Let's use the image to
provide a simplified explanation of what's going on.
Each variable does not contain a tuple, but references the same immutable tuple
object. See the objects and classes module for
more about objects. Let's say, we want to change the
element at index 2. Because tuples are immutable we can't,
therefore ratings 1 will not be affected by a change in rating
because the tuple is immutable, i.e we can't change it.
We can assign a different tuple to the ratings variable.
The variable ratings now references another tuple.
As a consequence of immutability, if we would like to manipulate a tuple
we must create a new tuple instead. For example,
if we would like to sort a tuple we use the function sorted.
The input is the original tuple, the output is a new sorted
list. For more on functions, see our video on functions.
A tuple can contain other tuples as well as other complex data types.
This is called nesting. We can access these elements using the standard
indexing methods. If we select an index with a tuple, the
same index convention applies. As such,
we can then access values in the tuple. For example, we could access the second
element. We can apply this indexing directly to
the tuple variable NT. It is helpful to visualize this as a
tree. We can visualize this nesting as a tree.
The tuple has the following indexes. If we consider indexes with other tuples,
we see the tuple at index 2 contains a tuple with two
elements. We can access those two indexes. The same convention applies to index
3. We can access the elements in those
tuples as well. We can continue the process. We can even
access deeper levels of the tree by adding another square bracket.
We can access different characters in the string or various elements in the
second tuple contained in the first. Lists are also a popular
data structure in Python. Lists are also an ordered sequence.
Here is a list, "L." A list is represented with square brackets.
In many respect, lists are like tuples. One key difference is they are mutable.
Lists can contain strings, floats, integers.
We can nest other lists. We also nest tuples and other data structures.
The same indexing conventions apply for nesting
Like tuples, each element of a list can be accessed via an index.
The following table represents the relationship between the index and the
elements in the list. The first element can be accessed by the name of the list
followed by a square bracket with the index number,
in this case zero. We can access the second element as follows.
We can also access the last element. In Python, we can use a negative index;
the relationship is as follows. The corresponding indexes
are as follows. We can also perform slicing in lists. For example, if we want
the last two elements in this list we use the following command.
Notice how the last index is one larger than the length of the list.
The index conventions for lists and tuples are identical.
Check the labs for more examples. We can concatenate or combine lists by adding
them. The result is the following. The new list
has the following indices. Lists are mutable, therefore we
can change them. For example, we apply the method extends
by adding a dot followed by the name of the method then
parentheses. The argument inside the parentheses is a
new list that we are going to concatenate
to the original list. In this case, instead of creating a new list,
"L1," the original list, "L," is modified by adding two new elements.
To learn more about methods check out our video on objects and classes.
Another similar method is append. If we apply append instead of extended,
we add one element to the list. If we look at the index
there is only one more element. Index 3 contains the list we appended.
Every time we apply a method, the list changes.
If we apply extend, we add two new elements to the list.
The list L is modified by adding two new elements.
If we append the string A, we further change the list,
adding the string A. As lists are mutable we can change them.
For example, we can change the first element as follows.
The list now becomes hard rock 10 1.2. We can delete an element of a list
using the del command. We simply indicate the list item we
would like to remove as an argument. For example, if we would like to remove
the first element the result becomes 10 1.2.
We can delete the second element. This operation removes the second element off
the list. We can convert a string to a list using
split. For example, the method split converts
every group of characters separated by a space
into an element of a list. We can use the split function to separate strings on a
specific character known, as a delimiter. We simply pass the
delimiter we would like to split on as an argument, in this case a comma.
The result is a list. Each element corresponds to a set of characters that
have been separated by a comma. When we set one variable B equal to A,
both A and B are referencing the same list.
Multiple names referring to the same object is known as aliasing.
We know from the list slide that the first element in B is set as hard rock.
If we change the first element in A to banana,
we get a side effect, the value of B will change as a consequence.
A and B are referencing the same list, therefore if we change A,
list B also changes. If we check the first element of B
after changing list A, we get banana instead of hard rock.
You can clone list A by using the following syntax.
Variable A references one list. Variable B
references a new copy or clone of the original list.
Now if you change A, B will not change. We can get more info on lists, tuples, and
many other objects in Python using the help command. Simply pass in the list, tuple, or any other Python object.
See the labs for more things, you can do with lists.
(Music)